####Canon assignment Banking Failures

###What are the causes of a banking failure?

Now we know a bit more about the functions of a bank and how it works, it is easier to explain what the causes of a banking failure are. Of course there is not a single cause of a failure, often a combination of different factors play a role in explaining why a banking failure happened. 

As seen in the previous sector, banks receive surplus money from people who do not need it at the moment (deposits) and loan this money to people who do need it (loans). This function of the bank is also where problems tend to exist. The maturity of a bank's liabilities are often shorter than the maturity of its assets. Deposits are often short term and can be withdrawn by customers at any moment. Loans on the other hand are long term, think about mortgages for example. All kinds of mismatching problems then start to develop. If either the assets drop in value or deposits are withdrawn at a massive rate, the bank will fail. 

What causes assets to drop in value and deposits to be withdrawn? We will start with the first. To illustrate this we use the 2008 financial crisis as an example. Before the crisis interest rates were relatively low while home prices were increasing. Many people therefore took out a mortgage. This seemed to be a good investment. Even people who were not really able to afford those mortgages were able to get one. As long as home prices increase, there is not really a problem. Then you make a profit and you are sure to finance your mortgage. However if home prices do not longer increase that is when problems start to arise. Interest rates also started to increase and therefore the monthly payments increased. Especially people who could not afford the mortgage in the first place, but who were not checked by the bank, could not afford the monthly payments. The borrowers therefore partly or even completely default on their loans. The bank's assets are therefore decreased in value and unless the bank has enough cash reserves, the bank is not able to pay off its depositors. 

A drop in the value of a bank's assets is not the only way a bank can become insolvent. As stated earlier, a withdrawal of liabilities i.e. deposits, can also cause a bank to become insolvent. If many depositors withdraw their money at the same time, this can also be called a bank run. Depositors do this because they believe that the bank is not able to repay their depositors. We showed this in the mortgage example. Deposits as stated before are liquid and can be withdrawn at any moment by the customer. The bank's assets are on the other hand illiquid and long term. A bank usually has some cash reserves but these reserves are dried up quite quickly. If then a lot of deposits are withdrawn at the same time, the bank has a problem. The bank has to sell these illiquid assets, for example mortgages. This is however not possible or it has to sell them at only a fraction of their true value. Again the bank's assets are then decreased in value and this will drain the capital reserves of the bank. The end result is that the bank will become insolvent. 
